 What is an IT Ticketing System?

The core function of an IT ticketing system is to manage all incoming requests from other departments in a company. Because IT departments tend to have a high volume of requests, they need a system to manage the lifecycle of every individual request, from submission to resolution. There are several online programs that provide services to accomplish this, from simple intake software to more sophisticated tools that triage and track issues. We’ll take a look at the variety of these functions later on.  

Essentially, an IT ticketing system is designed to keep IT teams up to date on the status of IT tickets. Each ticket will contain a technical problem or series of problems, and it is the IT team’s responsibility to resolve these issues in a timely manner. Using a ticketing system, eases the IT department’s stress by keeping all information organized in a central hub.

Sometimes, the IT department also doubles as a customer support center or help desk, and may be staffed by technicians who help people outside the company - typically customers or other product users - to resolve their technical issues. Regardless of whether the ticketing system will manage external or internal requests, the program should perform similarly. Let’s take a look at some of the most important features to consider when choosing which IT ticketing system to implement. 
What Should an Effective IT Ticketing System Provide?

IT teams require different types of software depending on the quantity and urgency of their incoming requests.  However, regardless of these specifications, the goal of an IT ticketing system remains the same: to increase the organization and efficiency of IT ticket response. 

A ticketing system should be easy to use and focus on communication and customer satisfaction. This is because a key objective of installing a ticketing system is ensuring better, faster communication between the ticket sender and issue resolver. It is not enough for a system to ease the intake process, the system must actually assist the IT team in quickly solving the issues. Ideally, all related parties will be able to track issue progress - this prevents unnecessary email chains and/or backlogs. Cloud-based ticketing solutions provide additional transparency with automatic updates, and therefore many companies are turning to these systems to maximize efficiency. 

There are several technical features that successful IT ticketing systems will have in common: 

    Self service portal: A one-stop shop where workers and customers can quickly and easily submit their tickets to IT (some products even allow you to track your submitted tickets). A self service portal can streamline the request creation process, and also help to eliminate unnecessary emails/phone calls between parties. Additionally, using a self service portal helps companies standardize the ticket intake process, which can lead to automated ticket routing, alerts, and ultimately, solution. Some examples of products offering self service portals include Zendesk and Freshdesk.
    Ticket log: Once a ticket is received, the next step is to log it. This could be as simple as a spreadsheet that lists incoming tickets by timestamp, but the important thing is that IT has an organizational system in place so that no ticket gets overlooked. More sophisticated tools offer additional features like sorting tickets by type of issue, automatically triaging requests to the appropriate team member, or tracking tickets through the solution process.
    Assigning tickets: To maximize the IT team’s bandwidth, tickets should be assigned to a single “owner” who will work on the ticket from start to finish. You can choose to manually assign tickets to team members, or find a product that automatically assigns tickets based on worker availability or appropriate knowledge base. To avoid heavy backlogs and build IT team integrity, however, remember to only assign workers the amount of work they can realistically complete in a timely fashion.
    Secure system: Security should be a top priority when choosing an IT ticketing system, even if tickets do not contain sensitive information. If you plan to run your operation through a web server, make sure you install Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) to create a secure network between the server and browser. Depending on the nature of information being sent, you may also need to heighten your security (for example, if you must be HIPAA compliant). Regardless of the level of security necessitated by your company, you should look for a secure system to ensure that information does not get leaked to the public (or even to non-relevant parties within your organization).
    Live support: Having a 24/7-staffed helpdesk or chat service can also help increase transparency and drive customer engagement with the IT department. You can use this assistance tool to troubleshoot technical issues before formally submitting a ticket, as to cut down the volume of tickets IT must process.

Many additional features can heighten the effectiveness of a ticketing system:

    Multiple channel support: For around-the-clock coverage, it can also be useful to maintain other support channels such as phone, email, or a mobile application. Utilizing multiple channels can help clarify a ticket or answer additional questions, but remember to have a single formal process in place so that tickets are always submitted through one central tool.
    Integrations: If data from another program needs to be included in the ticket, it can be helpful to find a tool that integrates with your ticketing workflows. In particular, you may want a product that integrates with your company’s email host to manage any tickets sent via email.
    File attachments: This feature can enhance the clarity of incoming tickets - users can attach screenshots of the problem or add documents relevant to their current issue. Of course, if you choose to allow file attachments, make sure you also have a document management system in place.
    Multi-lingual systems: If you have international company members or customers, you may want to look into translation services for your ticketing system. Technical issues can already be confusing, and you don’t want language barriers to slow your department’s turnaround time.
    Customization: Find a tool that allows you to modify certain features so that you can tailor the product to fit your IT department’s needs. Additionally, this will ensure that you can update your tracking system as your processes evolve over time, rather than purchasing a new system entirely.

Of course, these features alone will not necessarily ensure that your ticketing system is working effectively. As such, it’s important to establish a system for receiving feedback from your customers (this could be internal company members or external clients, depending on whether or not you run your IT department as a help desk, too). Consider implementing a reporting system where you review key metrics and analytics such as time to resolution, meeting deadlines, etc. Additionally, many IT teams find it helpful to institute a community forum or feedback survey - this personal, qualitative review approach will help build and maintain strong relationships and establish a system of accountability and trust among teams. 

Ultimately, an effective IT ticketing system should streamline the entire IT ticketing process, which will make both the IT workers’ jobs and the entire company run more smoothly